You killed him. How?
A single moment,
everything can change.
So...
I shot a man last week.
Really?!
Nobody normally gets killed
‘round here.
Itjust breaks your heart.
And you won’t believe this.
0h?
It was with a harpoon gun.
Typical.
ALL GIGGLE
Stop it! Stop it!
Oof.
This is a nice, civilised evening.
Give us a kiss, toodle—pip.
Alan Bennett’s award—winning
monologues...
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel...
James Cleverly, Brexit Minister
under Theresa May,
chairman of the Conservative Party
under Borisjohnson,
new Minister for the Middle East
and North Africa
at the Foreign Office.
Joining us down the line
from Wigan, Labour’s
Shadow Foreign Secretary, and
a candidate in the recent contest to
become party leader, Lisa Nandy.
Munira Wilson, elected
as an MP last December,
former tax consultant who went
on to work for children’s
charity and for the NHS,
and currently the Liberal Democrat
spokesperson for health
and social care.
Steve Parish, a businessman
and football fan who helped
save Crystal Palace from financial
ruin in 2010, and is now part owner
and chairman of the club.
And former hospital doctor turned TV
writer, responsible for massive hits
such as Line Of Duty and Bodyguard,
and for keeping us all on the edge
of our seats, Jed Mercurio.
Good evening.
Welcome to my guests here
in the studio, and of course Lisa
joining us down the line from Wigan.
And to our virtual audience,
thank you all for coming tonight.
You are all from Plymouth.
Thank you forjoining
us for the programme
tonight.
And, of course, thank you to you at
home forjoining us on the
programme too, and if you want to
join in the conversation on social
media, @BBC Question
Time is how to do it.
Let see what you’ve got to say.
And let’s hear ourfirst question
tonight, which is from Charlie
Shrimpton.
What does it tell us about this
government’s priorities
that it was forced into a U turn
by a footballer so that the poorest
children in the country would be fed
during the summer holidays?
Obviously talking about the free
school meal vouchers for children.
James?
m:
We have had to bring about an
unprecedented range of support
packages for individuals, for
businesses, for the self—employed
businesses, for the self-employed
and for
businesses, for the self—employed
and for families.
and forfamilies. We
businesses, for the self—employed
and for families. We were not going
to do this until Marcus Rashford
spoke up. We had already supported
families to help feed their children
duﬂng
during the Easter break and
ultimately, we are trying to get
back to more normal way of working
and we had hoped that we would not
need to put this additional support
package in place over the summer,
but we do listen and the government
did listen and Marcus put forward a
really compelling argument and we
did listen and the government
decided to extend the existing
scheme into the summer holidays. I
think it was the right thing to do
and ultimately what we are trying to
do, it is we are trying to get back
towards normality, because really
that is what everyone wants and that
is what we are working towards. Jed.
is what we are working towards. jed.
I think we
is what we are working towards. Jed.
I think we should pay tribute to
Marcus Rashford for the campaign,
what a great example he is and he is
a great footballer as well, I am a
Manchester United fan and I am
biased! What I would also say, I
sometimes despair of hearing things
railed
called U—turns. I
sometimes despair of hearing things
called U—turns. Ithink
called U—turns. I think it stops
rallad U-turns. Ithink it stops
peopla in
called U—turns. I think it stops
people in positions of authority,
peopla in positions of authority,
from
people in positions of authority,
from listening and changing their
minds and responding to the
democratic force that got behind the
campaign that Marcus started and
sometimes I worry that if we use
that type of language, it sometimes
makes it more difficult for
governments to do the right thing
and I would definitely say,
something that we should all
welcome, the fact that the
government listened and acted in the
“Y
way it had. Charlie, you are a
way it had. Chartie, you are a
teacher,
way it had. Charlie, you are a
teacher, what would your response?
jed, if you use
Jed, if you use language like a
jed, if you use language like a
U-turn
Jed, if you use language like a
U—turn and if you do the right thing
U-turn and if you do the right thing
in the first
U—turn and if you do the right thing
in the first place, you would not
need to use that language. I see
every day how these vouchers make an
impact and the difference of a child
having a meal and coming to school
is far greater than not having one
at all and gives opportunity to them
to be able to flourish and for that,
to be able to ﬂourish and for that,
there is no
to be able to flourish and for that,
there is no price. Steve? I would
agree with jed,
agree withJed, I think Marcus
Rashford is an example and lots of
footballers have been through this
crisis, or people who know the right
crisis, or peopla who know the right
thing to do, do
crisis, or people who know the right
thing to do, do the right thing and
act on the right way. I also agree
with jed that
with Jed that the language
act on the right way. I also agree
withJed that the language of
U—turns and all of this kind of
U-turns and all of this kind of
things that
U—turns and all of this kind of
things that we throw at politician
mean we do not get to the right
answer and it is important to get to
the right answer and I am pleased we
did, I
did, Ithink it is the
the right answer and I am pleased we
did, I think it is the right thing
and I am pleased that Marcus showed
our profession in the light I see it
in everyday. Long may the
government, any government we have,
continue to listen to the right
argument to make the right
decisions. One of the things that
were so compelling about Marcus
Rashford was him talking about his
own experience of poverty as a
child, going to his friends houses
when food was short in his own home.
Are there other footballers that you
know who have had that life
experience? The vast majority of
footballers come from backgrounds
that would not be considered
affluent. And what a lot of people
afﬂuent. And what a lot of peopla
don’t
affluent. And what a lot of people
don’t realise is what an extended
network of people they look after
network of peopla they look after
and are
network of people they look after
and are responsible for,
particularly many of the players
particularty many of the players
that
particularly many of the players
that come from overseas. The picture
that is portrayed of footballers as
being young men with too much money,
it really is not fair in most of the
rases
cases that I have come into contact
with. I have been incredibly proud
of all the players that I know and
the way they have acted through the
whole crisis. Lisa, the question is
whola crisis. Lisa, the question is
what does
whole crisis. Lisa, the question is
what does it tell us about the
priorities of the government that it
was forced into this decision by
Marcus Rashford. I agree with
Marcus Rashford. I agree withJed, I
Marcus Rashford. Iagree with jed, I
welcome
Marcus Rashford. I agree withJed, I
welcome the fact that the government
did a U—turn on this and I think the
did a U-turn on this and I think the
campaign that
did a U—turn on this and I think the
campaign that Marcus Rashford led
campaign that Marcus Rashford lad
was really
campaign that Marcus Rashford led
was really inspirational, but it
should not take a brave young
footballer to shame the government
into action. The real question is
how ran
how can we possibly only 48 hours
how ran we possibly only 48 hours
ago still have
how can we possibly only 48 hours
ago still have been debating whether
or not we were going to allow some
children to go starving hungry over
the school holidays. Even on the day
that we had that vote in the Houses
of Parliament, that Labour had
of Partiament, that labour had
rallad
of Parliament, that Labour had
called and the date the government
decided to U—turn, the Prime
decided to U-turn, the Prime
Minister
decided to U—turn, the Prime
Minister was at the dispatch box
denying the existence of children
who have been pushed into poverty
since 2012 and the fact that that is
projected to rise. This is a result
of an approach to government that
has systematically stripped support
away from children over the last
decade, so that now
decade, so that new schools in my
decade, so that now schools in my
constituency
decade, so that new schools in my
constituency have to
decade, so that now schools in my
constituency have to employ workers,
using the Pupil Premium to go to the
houses of children, put money in the
gas and electricity metre and deal
with rats and mice because the
parents simply do not have enough
money to make ends meet. When
money to make ends meet. WhenJames
money to make ends meet. when james
says let’s get
money to make ends meet. WhenJames
says let’s get back to normal, I say
let’s get back to a new normal and
build a better country based on
better values when we come out the
other side of this. These children
have been last up to now and been
invisible and let us make sure that
invisibla and let us make sure that
when we
invisible and let us make sure that
when we rebuild this country, let us
change that make sure that come
first. Belinda, I
first. Belinda, Iwas
change that make sure that come
first. Belinda, I was watching you
there nodding your head. Sorry, yes.
Looking at the root of the question
that Charlie asked, in terms of what
that Chartie asked, in terms of what
does it say
that Charlie asked, in terms of what
does it say about the government and
like you say, it took such a high
profilo
profile footballer for that to
profila footballar for that to
happen.
profile footballer for that to
happen. If we are responding to
coronavirus and the millions put
into this, in order to get to that
new normal, how can we trust the
new normal, how ran we trust the
government
new normal, how can we trust the
government that they are going to
make those decisions, without having
the intervention? Munira? In 2020 in
the United Kingdom no child should
be going hungry and the fact that it
has taken a footballer to help the
government to realise that and
actually change
actually change its policy I think
is shameful, frankly. It is not a
new issue, holiday hunger, we know
that several billion children suffer
from holiday hunger normally and
that is honestly exacerbated by the
crisis that we face. With the
crisis that we face. with the
Liberal
crisis that we face. With the
Liberal Democrats pushing to extend
this? Yes. In Wales, we have a
Liberal Democrat Education Secretary
and she committed to funding school
meals through the summer some time
ago and this is something we have
been pushing for and indeed, so had
the Labour Party and a number of
the labour Party and a number of
other
the Labour Party and a number of
other opposition parties. We are
hugely grateful to Marcus Rashford
and I am a huge fan of his and I
wish we were watching him in their
Euro 2020 at the moment, but we find
ourselves in the circumstances and I
am grateful that he has forced the
government to make this change and
so will many millions of children
across the country. Is it a bit
tricky, james,
tricky, James, for the days running
tricky, james, for the days mnning
“P
up to the
tricky, James, for the days running
up to the change of heart on this,
you had Cabinet ministers saying, we
are not going to change your mind,
we are refunding money through local
we are refunding money through [oral
councils
we are refunding money through local
councils and then Marcus Rashford
P°P5 “P
pops up and that is the thing that
makes the difference? It is worth
remembering that this is a scheme
that we had already put in place, we
are talking about extending an
existing scheme. It is also worth
remembering that the unprecedented
circumstances that we find ourselves
in has meant that the government
have put forward a range of support
packages at a scale that we have
never seen before in British
politic. So,
politics. 50, we are absolutely
determined to make sure that
families can put food on the table
families ran put food on the table
and that
families can put food on the table
and that is why we are supporting
peopla who
people who are furloughed at the
moment and we are working so hard to
get through this unbelievably
difficult set of circumstances.
Ultimately, we are trying to balance
the competing financial and social
pressures and sometimes, when
someone shines a
someone shines alight
pressures and sometimes, when
someone shines a light on a
particular issue and we look again
at it and we make the decision that
this is something that we can extend
this is something that we ran extend
and
this is something that we can extend
and should extend through the summer
and I am grateful that Marcus did
that, I
that, Iam very
and I am grateful that Marcus did
that, I am very grateful that we
listened and I’m grateful that we
responded. 0K,
responded. OK, let’s take another
question, from Debbie Norrish. Good
evening everyone.
Is a delay in learning of 6 months
genuinely devastating to a whole
generation as the chief inspector
of schools has stated?
That was suggested by the former
head, the Chief Inspector of
Schools.
Jed?
Devastating for a whole generation?
I think the problem with sending
kids back to school and the
delay is something we should
all be concerned about.
I think the fact is that the time
that children spend in
school at a vulnerable
age is precious time,
and I think it will be very,
very hard for them to catch
up, so I think that
definitely more should
have been done in terms
of
the planning.
I think that there has been
a failure of planning to get
children back into school.
I think that,
obviously, the pandemic
arrangements have put
an enormous strain
on the infrastmclure
is in
our society, but I also
think that if you look
at what is required
for
children to go back to school, it’s
not just the fact that children need
to go back to school —
it’s the society needs those
children back into school,
because of all the
things that surround
children being at school,
not requiring childcare
and so forth.
And I really wish that
the Government had gone about the
planning in a more forthright
and more detailed way.
Deborah, I’m wondering,
you’re asking the
question and I know you’re
a deputy headteacher.
The way you phrase it makes me
wonder if you think it
isn’t actually genuinely
devastating, or isn’t devastating
for a generation of children?
It’s been absolutely awful.
This week, so I work
at a secondary school in
Plymouth, and we’ve had
Year 105 and 125 back
for the first time,
and
first of all it’s absolutely
delightful to see them all.
But it’s absolutely
horrifying that we can’t
provide more, and they
are desperate for it.
Attendance this week
has been brilliant.
You know, clearly home
learning isn’t doing the job
for them that we needed to do.
We haven’t got clarity
yet on what is
going to happen with their exams
next year and assessment, and we are
desperate for further guidance
about planning for September, school
leavers.
Our students are becoming
disillusioned at not having that, I
think.
Marcia, you have your hand up.
I’m a parent to a Year ten
and I Year 12 children, and I was
wondering whether any
consideration is being
given to the request
for
reducing the curriculum content,
for the GCSE and A—levels
next summer.
Because of all the teaching
they will have missed?
Exactly.
Munira?
Well, I think everybody,
whether you are a parent,
teacher, a school governor,
everybody is desperate to get
children back to school.
We know the detrimental
impact it’s having on
their well being as well as on their
educational development, but clearly
we have to do that when it is safe.
And the Lib Dems have put a whole
range of suggestions in place for
children going back to school,
so you are not in any great
rush to get them back?
We have put forward a plan
which includes things like
identifying safe spaces
that could then...
Having a safe space register,
that would open up safe
community spaces that could
potentially be used as additional
space for schooling,
so you can then get kids
back to school safely.
My concern is, firstly,
the test and tray system clearly
the test and trace system clearly
isn’t up and running properly,
and forany part
of lockdown, whether that is schools
or parts of the economy to be opened
up, we need to be testing,
tracing and isolating every single
case to keep people safe.
The other thing is just
the lack of plan.
AsJed was saying.
I would have hoped there would have
been a plan put forward
with a range of scenarios perhaps
and certainly I was talking to head
teachers in my constituency
on Wednesday and they said to me, we
urgently need a plan so we can start
to prepare for September, so we know
what we are doing.
But we need that now.
Let’s see if we can find
out what the plan is.
We have James here.
One thing I would like to
add, a lot of parents
feel they haven’t had
a
voice in this debate
and there’s been this
big blame game going
on
between Government and the unions,
and the reason we ended up with a
slight change of guidance for
primary schools because there was
that lack of engagement and
communication between government and
schools and unions to
understand what was workable.
0K, what is the plan, James?
I have two boys school.
My eldest has just finished, and
unfortunately wasn’t able to sit his
A—levels.
So I know the huge and
understandable desire that parents,
teaching professionals,
the natural desire
they have for certainty
and
clarity.
This is an evolving situation.
You’re going to have to wait
for the announcement.
ﬂ
I don’t want to steal the thunder of
my colleagues in education. The
point is we are evolving the plan as
we learn more about the nature of
the vims.
the virus. We’ve got to make sure
the vims. We’ve got to make sure
the
the virus. We’ve got to make sure
the students are safe, that the
teaching professionals are safe, and
so this will mean we are having to
adapt, and that is disconcerting,
hugely disconcerting for parents. We
completely understand that. But we
want to make sure children don’t
miss out on their education.
Education is incredibly important,
and it’s not
and it’s notjust about the
and it’s not just about the
syllabus.
and it’s notjust about the
syllabus. It’s also about the social
interactions. So we want to make
sure we
interactions. 50 we want to make
sure we can re—establish teaching
sure we ran re-establish teaching
provision in a
sure we can re—establish teaching
provision in a way that is safe for
the students, for the staff, for the
teaching professionals and of course
their
theirfamilies. But isn’t
teaching professionals and of course
their families. But isn’t it
confusing for parents and students
alike when there was a plan
announced? If I recall, it was that
schools would go back on the 1st of
june, and
schools would go back on the lst of
June, and Michael Gove said it
schools would go back on the 1st of
June, and Michael Gove said it was
june, and Michael Gove said it was
safe for
June, and Michael Gove said it was
safe for them to go back on the 1st
of june, and it
ofJune, and it was predicated on
of june, and it was predicated on
having... I hate
ofJune, and it was predicated on
having... I hate to use the phrase,
but world beating test entry system.
There has been a failure to achieve
that. We need safety —— test and
that. We need safety -- test and
tray system.
that. We need safety —— test and
tray system. We need a functioning
test and trace system and low levels
of transmission. It’s not
of transmission. It’s notjust about
of transmission. It’s not just about
it being safer
of transmission. It’s notjust about
it being safer kids to go back to
school. It has to be said for
society. They travel. They interact
with staff. Those staff members
interact with people in their
households. And possibly the disease
ran be
can be transmitted to vulnerable
ran be transmitted to vulnerable
people.
So there has been a total failure to
deliver on the promises and that has
caused a great deal of confusion.
Well, I’m going to have to disagree
with you on the point you’re making
about the requirement for test and
trace and are planning around that,
the delivery of that. We now have a
testing system which test huge
numbers of people on a daily basis,
numbers of peopla on a daily basis,
hundreds
numbers of people on a daily basis,
hundreds of thousands of people, and
hundreds of thousands of peopla, and
that was
hundreds of thousands of people, and
that was driven forward.
that was driven forward. Set
incredibly challenging targets to
incredibly challanging targets to
expand
incredibly challenging targets to
expand that. I think we might get
onto this in a moment, and that’s
absolutely fine. They are just some
hands up in the audience. Tony? Yes,
hello. One of the things bugging me
about all of this, everything comes
down to the Government has to have a
plan, and the Government does have
to have a plan. Some of the ideas
that have come through are, frankly,
just incomprehensible. I was just
listening today to somebody saying
that the problem is we don’t have
enough space. We can open hotels, we
enough space. We ran open hotels, we
ran put up
enough space. We can open hotels, we
can put up marquees, and that way we
ran put up marquees, and that way we
ran get more kids
can put up marquees, and that way we
can get more kids back into school.
ran get more kids back into school.
Great
can get more kids back into school.
Great idea. It begs the question,
where are the teachers? Because you
wouldn’t have enough teachers to do
that, and those teachers we have
got, about 40% of them don’t want to
got, about 4096 of them don’t want to
go back anyway.
got, about 40% of them don’t want to
go back anyway. Sue? We all know
education is a great social leveller
education is a great social laveller
and a great
education is a great social leveller
and a great force for social
mobility, and with rising inequality
in the UK the fact that these
children...
children... The question of whether
six months of school is devastating
for a whole generation. Those
children with no access to the
internet, no computers at school, no
books on the book shelves behind
them, these are the children who are
particularty
particularly suffering from this,
particularty suffering from this,
and
particularly suffering from this,
and until we have, I’m sorry to
repeat it, but until we have
effective tracing in place, testing
and tracing, we can’t get there. We
cannot have like on the Isle of
cannot have like on the Isla of
Wight
Night 9095
cannot have like on the Isle of
Wight 90% of those people who are
Night 9096 of those peopla who are
traced
Wight 90% of those people who are
traced disappearing into the ether.
Deborah, you have your hand up.
Coming back to James about the
Coming back to james about the
points and
Coming back to James about the
points and the vision to get
students back into school, which is
exactly what we all want, the
implementation of some of the
policies the Government have
suggested haven’t necessarily turned
out as planned. The school laptops,
for example, in our school, the
disadvantaged laptop still haven’t
arrived. I know that announcement
today of the National tutoring
programme, in theory it sounds
fabulous, but in reality have we got
the capacity to implement what the
Government are trying to suggest?
Lisa? Well, the question was about
the impact on children, and I think
there is no question that this is
going to have a big impact on this
generation. It’s not
generation. It’s notjust about exam
generation. It’s not just about exam
results
generation. It’s notjust about exam
results and life chances, as
important as that is, but health
professionals are increasingly
worried this is having a real impact
on children’s mental health as well.
So we ought to be trying to get
children back to school as quickly
as can safely be achieved. It is why
as ran safely be achieved. It is why
it has
as can safely be achieved. It is why
it has been so frustrating to see
the Government’s response to this,
entering into this blame game and
refusing to work with people to
refusing to work with peopla to
build a
refusing to work with people to
build a national consensus around
this. I think we could sort this out
pretty quickly, actually. It is a
huge effort and it takes a lot of
work to get children back to school
safely
work to get children hack to school
safely with
work to get children back to school
safely with the social distancing
requirements, but if you think back
to when we were trying to get the
pub“:
public health efforts of the ground
and the Government did conceive they
needed to work with a wide variety
of partners, the army was brought in
to help construct hospitals, we had
peopla being
people being brought back out of
retirement in order to help boost
the workforce, and we need a
comparable effort for education. We
had efforts around health, we’ve had
efforts around the economy, but
education has really been the poor
relation. Lisa, is labour’s
position,
position, sorry to interrupt, but is
position, sorry to intermpt, but is
Labour’s
position, sorry to interrupt, but is
Labour’s position slightly
confusing? The Shadow Education
Secretary Rebecca Long—Bailey said
Secretary Rebeca Long-Bailay said
only last
Secretary Rebecca Long—Bailey said
only last week it was welcome that
the Government was rolling back from
full school reopening plans before
summer. It is welcome that they are
not trying to force schools to
reopen when it is not safe to do so,
and actually this is five months ago
we were calling for the Government
we were falling for the Government
to have
we were calling for the Government
to have an exit strategy from
lockdown, to start working on that
now, because the countries that have
managed to get children back to
school more quickly were planning
for this several months ago. They
have also done a lot more to try and
get support to children in the
meantime so when children do go back
to school we are not dealing with
this enormous attainment gap. The
Government promised laptops and
intranet connections months ago but
we are just still not seeing them
delivered around the country, we had
a plan announced today that said
they would be private tutoring
available. I really welcome this,
but once again school leader limit
have been left wringing their hands
saying, why haven’t you spoken to us
before you announce these? We have
had enough of back of the envelope
plans, we need a proper national
strategy and national consensus and
we need the Government to reach out
and work with schools in order to
get our children back to school as
quickly as possible. Steve, there
seems to be an element of some
schools planning their own furrow.
Private schools saying they are
going to get their own kind of apt
going, that they are committed to
getting all children back in school
by September. Look, I would agree
with Lisa on a lot of things. We
don’t seem to have a strategy to
exit the in any industry. You know,
fortunately, in football we had the
resources and the money to develop
our own strategy, and we can test
our own strategy, and we ran test
players twice a
our own strategy, and we can test
players twice a week, and we have a
fairty limited
fairly limited requirement without
fairty limited requirement without
supporters.
fairly limited requirement without
supporters. This virus most likely
will stay with us in disguise for
the foreseeable future. We all hope
for a vaccine, we hope for better
interventions, but we know they are
not likely to come. If the lockdown
worked, which we all think it did,
when we come out of lockdown
infections will rise. And if we
can’t track those infections and
ran’t track those infections and
trace
can’t track those infections and
trace them and quell those
outbreaks, we really are in for a
terrible time economically, and
coming back to the original question
I would say there will be limited
damage done to everything if we can
damage done to everything if we ran
get back to as
damage done to everything if we can
get back to as close to normal as
possibla by
possible by September. But if we
don’t get back to as close to normal
as possibla by
as possible by September or
children, businesses, children’s
future will be damaged for maybe
10-15 years.
10—15 years. So the next 2—3 months
10-15 years. So the next 2-3 months
are such a
10—15 years. So the next 2—3 months
are such a crucial period. It does
require everybody to stop the blame
game. It requires a massive, massive
national effort, and a can—do
national effort, and a ran-do
mentality
national effort, and a can—do
mentality and attitude that it
worries me that we seem to have lost
in this country. If we don’t do
that, we really are in serious
problems. White might look, you
probloms. white might look, you
mention,
problems. White might look, you
mention, and you mention as well,
jed, in terms of
Jed, in terms of contact tracing and
jed, in terms of contact tracing and
that moving us
Jed, in terms of contact tracing and
that moving us forward, we have a
question on that, so let’s come to
Gareth jones.
The current APP development
is experiencing problems,
if we don’t get it working does it
really matter, will it
make a difference to
preventing a second wave?
Does it really matter, Lisa Nandy? I
Does it really matter, Lisa Mandy? I
think it
Does it really matter, Lisa Nandy? I
think it does matter and I very much
support the Government in trying to
set this up because in the end if
you get the app up and running it
you get the app up and mnning it
will save
you get the app up and running it
will save lives, but the problem was
the Government was one from the
outset the path they were taking was
not going to work because the
technology just wasn’t compatible
with a lot of phones. There were
other countries, like Germany and
Australia, who were taking a similar
path to our Government, trying to
develop their own technology,
realised it wouldn’t work, listen to
those warnings, and actually went
down a different path. As a result,
Germany has just managed to launch
their app yesterday and they are
quite confident about how it will
work. So we really have to start
breaking the pattern here which is a
Government that shuts people out,
Government that shuts peopla out,
doesn’t
Government that shuts people out,
doesn’t listen to advice, doesn’t
seek to learn from expertise here in
the UK and overseas. And then find
later that they have to revisit
those plans because they have
unravelled very quickly. We saw it
unravellad very quickly. We saw it
over and
unravelled very quickly. We saw it
over and over again with a whole
over and over again with a whola
host of things.
over and over again with a whole
host of things. One of the real
outstanding problems with all of
outstanding problams with all of
this at
outstanding problems with all of
this at the moment is you have
pub“:
public health directors across
England saying that they still don’t
get. . .
get... The GPs in local areas don’t
get... The GPs in [oral areas don’t
get the results of
get... The GPs in local areas don’t
get the results of tests because the
Government set up their own private
sector testing facilities around the
country, so GPs simply don’t know
when their patients are testing
positive for Covid. Public health
directors are looking closely at
[oral
local outbreaks and having to make
decisions about managing local
outbreaks, but because they are not
getting that information they
getting that information theyjust
getting that information they just
simply
getting that information theyjust
simply don’t have the tools they
need to do the job, so we need a
reset here. It is right for the
Government to abandon the system if
it isn’t working but we need to ask
ourselves, why is it so often that
we end up having to unravel plans
over and over again because we
didn’t get them right in the first
place? Steve, I
place? Steve, Iwant
didn’t get them right in the first
place? Steve, I want to ask you not
only what you think about this
particular question, but also just
tell us a little about how you’re
managing at Crystal Palace, because
you have a kind of app of your own
there? Yes, it’s not a tracing app.
On the app, it seems incredible to
me so many countries are developing
their own I would have thought...
..certainly if the EU has a purpose
that might be one thing
that they could’ve got everyone’s
heads together on.
We all want exactly the same app
doing exactly the same thing,
which seems incredible.
We have a very simple app
where the players and the staff
fill in any symptoms,
because that’s as efficient a way
of catching the disease early.
Sometimes there is testing
where there can be a lag
between the time you test
and testing positive.
But, you know, developing these apps
is extremely complex.
As somebody who had a business that
developed this kind of thing,
the timescales that we are trying
to do it in are very,
very compressed.
And I’m pleased today that
they’re adapting to Google
and Apple technology which,
you know — I would hazard a guess —
they might be better
at producing stuff than,
you know, people in our Government.
So, look, let’s hope
that we can all get together.
The blame game on both sides I think
really does need to stop.
It’s a very difficult situation.
Nobody was prepared
for the situation.
But, you know, we can see Germany
have done slightly less worse
than everybody else.
We’ll need to look back...
They’ve done a lot better in terms
of their death toll.
They have done in terms
of their death toll,
but I think when we look back
on this 10,000 deaths is too many.
You know, for this to get
to the extent that it did come
into the amount of countries that it
has, you know, the world really
needs to look at it and make sure
that these kind of outbreaks
are jumped on way before the kind
of things we are discussing now.
Because we are talking now
a pandemic that is broadly out
of control in the world
that we are trying to get on top of,
and it is going to be
extremely difficult.
And we do need to come together,
as a country, private interface,
the Government, both sides
of the House, and try and find
a solution in the next
two or three months,
or we really could be
in a terrible situation.
Mike, you’ve had your
hand up from the start.
Yes, I was going to say,
with Apple and Google, there’s good
parts in both applications.
Surely these companies could come
togetherfor once, you know,
because there’s a big pandemic on,
and sort of resource...
Put their resources together.
Well, I think they are putting
their resources together
for the benefits of this particular
app, as I understand it.
Charles 7
Yes.
It just seems that this is just
another moment of Government bluster
actually hitting reality.
50 Matt Hancock and Baroness Harding
said today that they backed both
horses of the Google and the android
model and the NHS app,
but they’ve always insisted
until this point that they were only
going to pursue the NHS app.
So itjust seems that the Government
are trying to make it seem that
they’re trying to do the job
possible but when it comes
to reality they want to cover up
and not pretend that they’ve
done anything wrong.
Jed?
Well, I think that the app can only
really be an adjunct.
I think there are technological
limitations in the app in terms
of providing a nationwide service.
And, really, it’s about having
a functioning public health
infrastructure that is able to deal
with outbreaks locally,
and unfortunately the Government has
chosen to centralise and use
a private company, Serco,
to take the lead on this.
And I think that a lot of public
health officials and workers,
as Lisa said, are frustrated
that they are not receiving
the information — they’ve
kind of been shutout,
whether intentionally
or not, I don’t know.
But they do feel that
they’ve been shutout,
and that it does, then,
limit is in terms of our
ability to do exactly
what we are all asking for.
As Steve said, where
is that can do attitude?
Can we crush this virus so that
society can get back to normal
and our kids can get back
into school and their businesses
can get up and running?
And a lot of the businesses
and the particular sectors that
are looking to get back frankly
don’t have much confidence.
And what about your business?
I mean, getting Line Of Duty —
I see that as an unashamed fan,
I have to confess —
getting that back up and running?
Well, it is interesting that
you give that specific example
because we had an outbreak
during the shoot, over in Belfast,
when there was the test
and trace system originally,
the containment phase.
And we were able to deal
with that, and we were able
to carry on uninterrupted.
Then, towards the end
of the shoot that got curtailed,
we had another outbreak
and I was quite surprised to learn
that we weren’t able to do
testing and tracing,
the system had been stopped.
And that was the point where,
really, when we looked at it,
we knew that we couldn’t
protect our workforce
and we had to stop.
And that was nine days
before the lockdown.
So the writing was on the well then,
and I think a lot of businesses
are just going to take
responsibility for it themselves.
I think that each TV production
will organise their own testing
and they will look after each other
and do their best that way.
And, James, obviously we had
the announcement today
from the Health Secretary
about switching horses, I think,
was the analogy Matt Hancock used.
But he also said, "We backed both
horses throughout" —
the NHSX app and also this other
app, kind of Google Apple app.
What I don’t understand
about that is if the Government has
been backing both those things,
it’s nowjettisoned one —
why isn’t the other one ready?
Well, I mean, these
apps, we talk about...
I mean, Lisa implies
there was an obvious right answer.
There clearly wasn’t
an obvious right answer...
But if you’ve been backing them both
and other countries are already
introducing their own apps,
how come the other one isn’t ready?
So the idea that there was
an obvious right answer is wrong,
otherwise every country in the world
would have done the same thing.
That’s not what happened —
Germany as an example.
And what Matt did was exactly
the right thing to do,
which is not to put all our eggs
in one basket, to make sure
that we were developing, you know,
the in—house app as it
were and the app
through third parties.
So how ready is this app, then?
And it was tested on the Isle
of Wight and the decision was made
to go with the other option,
and that’s the right thing to do,
and it’s about learning
as we go through this
and making the decision.
I don’t know exactly
when the app will go live.
Because we heard it
might not be till winter.
So, as I say, I don’t
want to guess and speculate.
I don’t know exactly
when the app will go live,
but obviously we will continue
working with international
friends and partners,
we will learn from what other
countries are doing, and the whole
world is learning as we go,
to make sure that we bring
about a test and trace app that can
be used to protect us all.
Gareth?
Yeah.
Do you not think that the public
are going to see this
as another U—turn again,
and it’s going to be even harder
to get the public on board
to actually use the app when it
does become live?
And do you worry about that,
loss of public confidence?
No, because, I mean...
Which is critical, obviously,
if it’s going to work.
We use the word U—turn.
I mean, I was in business before
I came into politics,
and if you’re going to test a couple
of options, see which one progresses
best, see which one works,
and then invest your time and effort
in the better performing
one of those options,
that’s not a U—turn.
That’s why it was tested
on the Isle of Wight...
0K.
That’s why, you know,
we learn from their experiences.
So you have been trialling the other
option on the Isle of Wight as well?
Well, as...
No, but the point...
Oh, you haven’t?
The point that Matt was saying...
No, hang on, Ijust want
to be clear, because now
I really don’t understand.
So if Matt Hancock said
you were backing both options,
and you are trialling the NHSX app,
presumably you are trialling
the other one as well, otherwise...
That’s what backing both options is.
No, that’s...
Isn’t it?
So the test of our in—house app
was done on the Isle of Wight.
We were keeping our options open
for the use of either...
So you haven’t trialled
the other one?
The other system is being used more
widely so doing a discreet UK
only trialfor that one,
my understanding, and I’m willing
to be corrected on this...
So we haven’t tried it, but you’re
relying on other countries?
Because it’s being used elsewhere.
Right.
So it’s not necessary
for us to trial both.
0K, I’ve got that clear.
The reason we were trialling
is to make sure that we chose
the best option because each option
had their advantages
and disadvantages.
It was not clear cut at the start
of this process that this
would be the better option.
That’s why you test.
Munira.
I can’t overstate how important
getting test and trace right
and getting it right as quickly
as possible is.
Everybody who is watching this
evening is desperate to try and get
back to some sense of normality.
Without a robust, operational test
and trace system it’s impossible
to be able to do that safely.
We have to be able to find
every case and isolate it
and suppress this virus.
What is very clear to me
is when I had a conversation with
the Deputy Chief Medical Officer
on the 13th of March it was around
then that we stopped routinely
testing and tracing every incidence
of coronavirus, and I questioned
her hard, and I said,
"Why are you stopping the testing?
We should be testing every case."
And it was down to capacity.
And it had been far too late.
It was some weeks after that
that we suddenly saw a focus
on ramping up testing.
And, great, we’ve got the capacity.
But, James, we haven’t had
for almost a month now the figures
on how many people have actually
been tested, on a daily basis,
and on tracing, as Lisa has said,
we need to be working much more
closely with local authorities.
Directors of public health have
been crying out to be
leading this effort.
They are the experts.
I didn’t watch the Salisbury
poisonings earlier this week,
but I heard in there it showed just
how pivotable the role
of the Director of public health is.
That is what they should be doing.
That’s what they are experts in,
and they should be leading those
teams of contact tracers to be
tracing every case.
But last week I was talking to some
leaders in local Government,
and they haven’t got the data,
they haven’t got the tools.
They are still coming
to some extent, unclear
about what their role should be,
and this is absolutely
critical if we want to open
up our economy again.
I think it’s telling that you got
an honest answer about the reason
testing was abandoned in March.
What we were told, the public,
was told was that it wasn’t
appropriate for an economy
of our size.
Our institutions...
You know, we talk about
the Government all the time letting
us down, but Public Health England
made that decision.
In Germany they devolved it very
quickly into the local authorities.
I would also say, I mean,
we can’t have the whole
of the United Kingdom hanging
on developing an app.
Test and trace is
possible to do manually.
Most of it, as you said, will happen
manually, even with the app.
The app is 15 minutes in proximity,
two metres, to somebody.
It’s just an adjunct.
You can remember if you were with
somebody for 15 minutes.
Yeah.
You know, we need to get test
and trace rolled out manually,
and if the app comes along and helps
us do it then great,
but we can’t wait for that.
But it’s also about people receiving
accurate information.
When you have public health
officials, when you have
Government scientists,
saying things which are manifestly
untrue, which is that it
wasn’t appropriate —
it was actually all about resources,
but they didn’t admit that.
And so now we are in a situation
again with the trust has broken
down, people are desperate to get
good quality information they can
rely on from their government,
from their public health officials,
so that people can make the right
decision to make the right
calculations about risk,
about how we get back to normal.
I think, Steve, you talked about...
Briefly, though, because Ijust
want to move on to another question.
You talked about ending
the blame game.
I think the public appreciate
that we are in an unprecedented
situation and know government
is going to get it right,
but the thing that frustrates me
most about this government
is that theyjust don’t
have the humility to put their hands
up when they’ve actually
got it wrong.
When they do that they
say it’s a U—turn.
They are holding their hands up
and saying they got it wrong,
and then they are told it’s
a U—turn, so that’s not
an environment that’s conducive
to people making the right
decisions, is it?
That is the blame game,
that’s exactly what it is.
No, but isn’t there a difference
between making a U—turn
on policy and just lying?
There’s a difference
between those two things.
Well, I certainly think...
I certainly think the information,
as you just pointed out,
that they’ve received from some
of our institutions
and scientists, and I’m not
here to defend them blindly —
everybody’s made terrible mistakes.
You know, where there was a left
turn to make we took the right one
on almost every occasion,
and we have to learn from it.
But I don’t think when we look back
there will be any one
single reason, you know...
Oh, you’re absolutely right, Steve.
And I think we have to consider that
when we move forward and that’s
the most important thing,
how we move forward.
0K.
Moving forward involves learning
from your mistakes and being honest,
and unfortunately that gap
between the learning behaviour
and the transmission
of the information about what has
been learned and where mistakes
were made, and I think that
that is problematic for people
to have confidence about
the information they receive
and how they go forward.
OK, I’m going to move
on because we have another question
on a different topic
which I want to get
in, from Laura Hill.
Earlier this week,
the Prime Minister announced
a review into racial inequality
in the country.
Isn’t now the time for action rather
than just another review?
Munira?
Absolutely.
Unfortunate that the announcement
was buried in a piece
about Winston Churchill’s statue.
People are angry,
people are hurting.
That’s why despite the fact that
we’ve got a public health emergency
and nobody wants to see crowds out
on the street people feel moved
to go out and protest,
having been outraged by what they’d
seen happen in the US
with George Floyd but also
with the huge inequalities that have
been exposed by the virus.
We’ve seen the BAME communities
disproportionately affected.
Specifically what action do
you think should be taken?
Well, there’s already been
a whole host of reviews
where the recommendations have yet
to be implemented, and in terms
of the Home Office ending
the hostile environment would be
a good place to start, for instance.
But there’s also things
like suspicionless stop and search.
We know that black individuals
are 47 times more likely to be
stopped and searched,
and I received last week a letter
about a 15—year—old mixed race
boy in my constituency,
a law—abiding young man.
I heard from his headteacher.
And he has been stopped countless
times by the police.
They are convinced
its racial profiling.
When he’s out, even when he’s been
out with his white friends,
the police have stopped him
to question him, but
not his white friends.
His parents are terrified that
at some point he’s going to get
into more trouble because he’s
going to react to being stopped.
This shouldn’t be happening.
And there are clearly systemic
issues that need to be tackled,
and that’s where, you know,
David Lammy’s review,
we are still waiting for some
of those recommendations
to be implemented.
So, yes, another review
is important, but it shouldn’tjust
be a research project.
It should be setting goals
and targets and measures for us
to be tracking progress against.
I mean, Ijust had a little look
through the number of reviews
that there have been,
and by my counting anyway there have
been eight reviews in the last three
years looking into race
or the effect of race as part
of a bigger project.
Why do you need another one?
Well, reviews are how governments
learn about what needs
to change, what needs...
But most of these are your
government reviews and there have
been eight in the last three years.
Look, I am not going to...
I’m not going to suggest
that the Government should stop
learning and stop understanding,
so I’m comfortable with reviews.
And, actually, I’m also very proud
of the fact that I’m part
of the government that has made
some real differences.
So, for example, and I know these
figures will now be distorted
because of the situation
with the coronavirus,
but up until that point the increase
in employment had disproportionately
benefited people from black
and other ethnic minority groups,
and having a job I think
we would all agree is a foundation
stone for a better life.
We have looked at the impact
of stop and search.
When I worked with BorisJohnson
when he was Mayor of London
we looked at how crime
disproportionately affected black
Londoners and he has carried that
passion now with him into Downing
Street.
And it’s easy when people say, oh,
we should do something, then
when asked what it is you should do
you are unable to give an answer,
because it is not simple
and it is not the kind of change
that can happen overnight,
but I’m incredibly proud of the work
that the Prime Minister has done,
both as Prime Minister
and as Mayor of London,
to try and close the gap
between the lived experience
of ethnic minorities in the UK...
We’ve got lots of hands up here,
so let’s hear from some of them.
Marsha?
Can I just say...
I think after you’ve mentioned
there have been eight reviews,
I think reviews aren’t enough.
It’s time now for reform.
And I think we should start at least
by educating children,
in school, about black culture
and black history.
So that it can start there.
Ithink...
I mean, too many people...
If you are saying a 15—year—old
was stopped several times
by the police and it was racial
profiling, that doesn’t come
from one specific police officer.
That comes from the whole attitude
of people in general,
police officers in general,
and they didn’t go to the police
force with that attitude.
I think that came from the way
they were brought up or things
that they have learned,
you know, in their lives
as they’ve grown up.
I think if people had a different
attitude towards black
people as they grow up it
would start there.
0K, lots of hands up.
I will try and get round
as many of you as I can,
so, reasonably briefly,
Anthony?
People don’t want another review.
They want to see change.
That’s why they’re on the streets.
That’s why it’s brought them
out onto the streets.
Like you said, eight reviews —
and what has changed for them?
All that I see is that there
is a large section of this nation
who are disenfranchised
with the whole scenario.
They want to see change.
And there are things
that can be done.
You know, we could teach
the children about black history
in school, they can
introduce culture, black
culture and ethnic culture
into the curriculum.
It’s their country.
People have got to be
made to feel like it’s
their country, but they’re not.
Sorry, I will come back to you,
James, forgive me — I will allow
you to come back in.
Tony?
Yeah.
I’m afraid all this carries on.
I have a right to my
expression as well.
And the black population
puts itself about —
The Black Lives Matter
movement is excellent,
but they do themselves no favours
when they riot in London.
There is plenty of government
legislation for racial equality.
The Government have done a lot
to try and make sure
that we have racial equality.
It’s the people that get it wrong,
and I’m afraid a lot of the time
the way that the Black Lives Matter
movement conducts itself does
them no good at all,
does them no favours.
Well, Tony, as I’m sure
as you know, there was violence
but it was from a minority
of people, and there were huge
amounts of peaceful protests
on the streets as well.
Belinda?
Just listening to what James has
been saying and also some
of the other audience members,
you know, we do need to learn,
for all the points we’ve been
discussing this evening,
and like the audience member said,
it’s time for action.
And just the previous comment then
shows a certain element of ignorance
about what is actually
happening right now.
As a teacher, you know,
our curriculum changed
and was reduced to become
English Heritage, and it’s not
just about black history
that we need to learn.
It’s about our history,
our Anglo centric history,
warts and all, that needs to be
learned, and also needs to be
put into learning now,
so that we don’t have future
generations with similar attitudes
that willjust perpetuate this.
Sue?
Stephen Lawrence was killed
before my son was born
and he’s graduated now.
The Macpherson report
of recommendations
were not put into place.
Grenfell was another case
where we said, this has to be
a watershed and things
have to change.
We can go all the way
back to Windrush.
Nothing is changing.
Review after review after review,
and we have peaceful
Black Lives Matter demonstrations,
and it’s the white supremacists
who turn up, if you like,
who are causing the trouble
at these demonstrations.
But it’s not individuals.
This is institutional and it goes
through the whole of the UK society.
Steve, let me bring you back
to Laura’s original question.
Earlier this week the Prime Minister
announced a review into racial
inequality in the country.
Is it now the time for action rather
than just another review?
I absolutely think
it’s time for action.
I mean, we have some
experience of this.
We have a big academy
with 212 boys in it at
any one time and, you know,
there are many, many facets of this
problem that we all accept exists.
One of the biggest ones
I see is really based
around social mobility,
and the frustrating thing for me is
that we all have it in our power
to make a difference.
You know, again, this is one
of those things we can put
to Government, or we
can make a change.
What I see in the boys we’ve got
is that they don’t have...
Even if they are,
you know, academically
strong and bright, they don’t
have the networks that we have.
They don’t get
the opportunities that
people in our network get.
And all of the people
that were involved in
the protests, you know,
from the privilege side
of the debate, if you like,
can all make a difference.
They all run companies,
own companies, they can give
opportunities, whether it is work
experience, internships, to help
people along the road
on the journey.
And we can start making
a difference now.
We can all individually
start making a
difference tomorrow,
and we know we can.
And we don’t need to wait
for a Government review to do it.
The Government review might help,
it might come up with things that we
can do with the police
and to change attitudes.
I certainly think, having looked
at this whole issue of
history and statues,
that we need to review some things.
You know, I think if we
wouldn’t put a statue up
of that person now, why
would we continue to have it?
Do we want a statue
to a man who brought 90,000
slaves into the country
and killed 19,000 of them?
You know, not for me.
Whilst I think there are people
like Churchill, who although
misguided in some beliefs
at the time overall
were a force for good,
so I’d like to see real change.
I’d like to see us
grasp the moment that
we’ve got and have some kind of way
that we bring about more equality,
certainly in the workplace.
Jed?
I think Steve said so many
important things there,
and we’ve heard a lot of really
great points as well.
I’d like to maybe bring
in a timely example,
because there was a recent review
which looked at the effects
of Covid, and one of the troubling
findings was about the vulnerability
of certain ethnicities to
coronavirus, specifically in terms
of front line health care staff.
And I certainly think that
an opportunity was missed to look at
the risks that people
are experiencing based on their
ethnicity and whether there should
be redeployment of some staff,
whether there should be changes
in roles and that
should be factored in.
As someone who’s still got a lot
of friends who are in the medical
profession, some of whom are in
those particularly vulnerable
groups, I do worry that something
should’ve been done, that that
review should’ve been acted upon,
and I can’t think of a better
example in terms of
the time we are at now.
Lisa?
Well, I was a bit concerned
to hear Tony saying that
the way the Black Lives Matter
protesters conduct themselves
doesn’t help their cause, because
I’ve been tremendously inspired
actually by a lot of the young
people who’ve come out and taken
to the streets in recent weeks,
and I think they are standing up and
using their voice and the platform
that they have in order to try and
get change while generation
after generation have been failed.
You know, James said, "Well,
what you actually want to be done?"
But the Government itself
has sponsored four
reviews in the last four years
which have made 201 recommendations.
Those recommendations
actually have common
themes to them.
It’s about changing recruitment
practices so we get far
better representation at every level
in the criminaljustice
system, in the workplaces
and across society.
It’s about having a better education
system so that people to understand
how this clinician actually works
and understand the complexity of the
history that we’ve got.
It’s about having better
legal representation.
It’s about incomes as well.
We were just talking
about child poverty, but
actually if you’re black you’re more
likely to be poor, you’re more
likely to be stopped by the police.
There are real disparities
in the immigration system as well.
These are things that
should be well known
to any politician of any party.
And thing now is that we get
on and implement them.
You can see why people
are so frustrated.
And I’lljust say this as well.
My dad’s generation
were amongst those who
fought for racial
equality in this country.
And they did make huge strides
forward. The way that they did it in
the end was through leadership,
people like Roy
people like RoyJenkins who stepped
forward to bring in the Race
Relations Act, and that was at a
time that that was deeply
controversial and pretty unpopular
in Britain. I would say to James, I
in Britain. I would say tojames, I
think the
in Britain. I would say to James, I
think the Government’s in action is
based on a very dim view of people
in this country. Most people in this
in this country. Most peopla in this
country now
in this country. Most people in this
country now strongly believe
discrimination harms all of us even
if we are not strongly affected by
it. We care about one another, we
it. We rare about one another, we
are a
it. We care about one another, we
are a tolerant society, and the
Government really needs to get on
and implement the recommendations
from these reports, not
from these reports, notjust kick
from these reports, not just kick
this into
from these reports, notjust kick
this into the long grass because if
we have learned anything over the
last few weeks it is that this just
won’t cut it any more. James,
won’t cut it any more. james,
promised to
won’t cut it any more. James,
promised to let you back in. Thank
you. I
you. lam not and
promised to let you back in. Thank
you. lam notand I
you. I am not and I would never
you. lam not and Iwould never
suggest that
you. I am not and I would never
suggest that there is an improvement
that could be made. There is a huge
amount of improvement that could be
made. But to imply that we’ve not
progressed is
progressed isjust
made. But to imply that we’ve not
progressed is just factually wrong,
and deeply insulting. Steve and I
grew up in South East London, and
although he is infinitely better
looking, he has a couple of years
older, and I remember when the
National
Nationalfront march
older, and I remember when the
National front march through my
streets... That would never happen
now. when
now. When I was first elected onto
now. when I was first eluted onto
the
now. When I was first elected onto
the London assembly. I sat next to
an elected member of the British
National Party, and explicitly
racist political party, elected into
racist political party, eluted into
the
racist political party, elected into
the London Government by the voters
of London. That would never happen
now. When I was at school I had no
now. when I was at school I had no
idea... My mum
now. When I was at school I had no
idea... My mum was a black nurse,
and my parents were a mixed race
couple, getting spat at in the
street. That would never happen now.
We have progressed so far. And, yes,
there’s definitely room for
improvement, but to deny the
positive steps this country has
made... Come on... We are asking
why... That level of progress and
that level of ambition? You know
what needs to be done. Sire make the
point I am making... And, again, I
have been taught --
have been taught —— I have been
have been taught -- I have been
taught black
have been taught —— I have been
taught black people in business, in
taught black peopla in business, in
the civil
taught black people in business, in
the civil service, we are moving in
the right direction and, yes, we
should always aspire to move further
and faster, but we must never deny
the progress we have made.
Otherwise, unsurprisingly, young
black people in Britain will think
black peopla in Britain will think
that
black people in Britain will think
that there has been no progress, and
that’s just wrong. It’s wrong. 0K,
Lisa, I’m sure you want to come back
in, but I’m afraid our error is up.
You’re shaking your head. Sorry,
Lisa, I
Lisa, Iran’t
You’re shaking your head. Sorry,
Lisa, I can’t bring you back in. We
are out of time. Today our questions
fame
came from Plymouth. Thank you to all
of you, and next week as the last in
the current series and we are
looking at an audience, a special
audience of people under the age of
30. Remember
30. Rememberthat,
audience of people under the age of
30. Remember that, folks. You can
30. Remember that, folks. You ran
apply to be in our
30. Remember that, folks. You can
apply to be in our virtual audience
if you are under the age of 30 from
anywhere in the UK. Do get in touch.
The way to do it is to go to the
website and apply the usual way, as
I say, the Question Time website,
and we will get back in touch with
you. If you want to carry on
tonight’s discussion, you can, as
tonight’s discussion, you ran, as
always, every
tonight’s discussion, you can, as
always, every week, carry on that
discussion with Question Time Extra
Time, on Five Live now. But thank
you to all of you for coming
tonight. Lisa, thank you for
tonight. Lisa, thank you forjoining
tonight. Lisa, thank you for joining
us down
tonight. Lisa, thank you forjoining
us down the line. I know you are in
that room so we couldn’t hear your
five-year-old
five—year—old and I can tell you we
five-year-old and I ran tell you we
didn’t hear your
five—year—old and I can tell you we
didn’t hear your fibro tonight.
Thank you to all of you for
Thank you to all of you forjoining
Thank you to all of you for joining
in I kind
Thank you to all of you forjoining
in I kind of flavour of what
in I kind of ﬂavour of what
question
in I kind of flavour of what
question time used to be like and we
will get back there one day ——
will get back there one day --
didn’t
will get back there one day ——
didn’t hear your five—year—old
didn’t hear your five-year-old
tonight. And
didn’t hear your five—year—old
tonight. And of course thank you to
all of you for watching Question
Time. I
Do you think this is
an assassination attempt?
We don’t know yet.
Novichok - in terms of protecting
citizens,
this is about as bad as it gets.
Is he going to be OK? I don’t know.
You and your family are now at the
centre of an international incident.
SIREN WAILS
All we know
is that for the peopla in Salisbury,
we are their only line of defence.
We’re looking
for Britain’s next make-up star.
Ding—dong!
Judged by some of the biggest names
in the business.
The Celebrity MasterChef challenge —
cook a dish,
aiming for this reaction...
..not this one.
It’s proper scary.
Come on, be a pancake.
Be a pancake.
What’s the difference between
a good and a bad dhal?
I don’t know,
but we’re about to find out.
When I tried it, it was white,
and this is more like
Oompa Loompa colour.
My plastic timer’s gone in the oven!
Who will rise and who will fall?
Service!
I think it’s time to catch
up with an old friend.
Oh, I like the sound of that!
Do you want me to give you some
clues about who I have arranged
for us to have a reunion with?
Yes.
Yeah.
Journalistic legend.
0K.
Has worked in many mediums.
Whether television or newspapers.
0K.
Sometimes has quite a lot of tweets,
saying people wish we would get out
of the way and let him come back.
Oh, I know who that is!
It’s Andrew Neil!
Hello, Andrew.
Hello to you!
Nice to hear from you.
We have called you up
and tapped you up,
because we want to get all your
thoughts about the Franco British
relationship on this special,
special day, when everyone has been
thinking about Charles de Gaulle.
Well, I am glad you have,
because the Franco British
relationship is actually in pretty
good condition at the moment, which
may surprise you.
Brexit, you think, might
have derailed it, but
curiously, what is actually meant,
and I will come on and talk a bit
more about this, is that Brexit has
put more of a premium on the
bilateral issue between London and
Paris than before and I expect we
are going to see it develop a lot
more in the months ahead, regardless
of how the Brexit negotiations go.
And much more news from our South of
France correspondent very shortly.
On this episode of the
Coronavirus Newscast.
The Coronavirus Newscast,
from the BBC.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And it’s Laura in the studio,
but I am going to say, Bon
Soir instead.
Bon Soir, Laura, from
Christophe in Le Box of News.
And you get to go that bit further.
We’ll talk about Charles de Gaulle’s
famous speech, it was
the 80th anniversary of it today,
and we thought we would mark it by
getting a living famous French
legend to recreate it, in their
living room.
And we got, David Ginola.
IF}
Fantastic!
Alors!
Honour.
Common sense.
And in the interests of the country,
we require that all free
Frenchmen, wherever they he, should
continue the fight as best they may.
Stirring stuff from David Ginola.
Also, not sure if you
are aware, it is also
the third anniversary
of the
first ever episode of
a podcast called Brexitcast.
I didn’t know that.
That is why the Elysee Palace sent
the President to London today.
Did he not pop in
and see you, Chris?
He didn’t, no.
He didn’t have time, apparently.
Never mind.
Right, on with today’s news.
So, Dominic Raab,
the Foreign Secretary,
has made some controversial comments
on the radio this morning, when he
was asked about this symbol that
people have been doing, of taking
the knee, whether it is American
footballers doing it a few years
ago, or British footballers doing it
in the last couple of days,
in solidarity with Black
Lives Matter campaigners.
Here is what Dominic Raab
said when he was asked
about it this morning.
I understand this sense
of frustration and
restlessness which is driving
the Black Lives Matter movement.
I’ve got to say,
on this taking the knee
thing, which I don’t
know, maybe it’s got
a broader history,
but it
seems to be taken from
the Game of Thrones.
It seems to me like
a symbol of subjugation or
subordination, rather than one
of liberation and emancipation.
But I understand people
feel differently
about it, so it is a matter
of personal choice.
So, would you or wouldn’t you do it?
I would take the knee for two
people, the Queen and
the missus, when I
asked her to marry me.
LAUGHTER.
That was Julia Hartley—Brewer
interviewing the
Foreign Secretary on Talk
Radio this morning.
Yes.
Laura, subjugation, Game of Thrones?
I think it is fair to say that
that was not the most
diplomatic choice of words
from the politician who is,
after all, our diplomat in chief.
And, for several reasons,
number one, this is an
enormously emotive and sensitive
subject and I think all politicians
normally try to carefully be as
sensitive as they possibly can and,